the moon is the earth's closest space
neighbor and its only natural satellite
it likely formed when a huge mars-sized
object
crashed into our planet billions of
years ago
i wasn't around then this catastrophe
turned earth into a scorching ball of
molten rock
it also pushed some material into its
orbit creating the moon
now this heavily cratered sphere moves
around our planet
this causes high and low tides around
the globe
a bit more than one-fourth the size of
earth it's the fifth
largest natural satellite in the solar
system
the moon has several phases for example
new
full or crescent moon first and last
quarter
but whatever the satellite looks like
you can always find it in the night sky
and sometimes even during the day
but imagine waking up at night and
noticing that the moon
looks somewhat different than usual it
seems brighter
and bigger it's hardly noticeable
especially when you're half asleep
you go back to bed unaware that instead
of the moon
you've just seen mercury close up this
planet
the nearest to the sun is similar to our
natural satellite
its surface is littered with craters
left by space rocks
mercury is about two-fifths the size of
our planet but it's still a bit larger
than the moon
that's why the planet would have a
greater influence on earth
nights would become brighter high tides
would become higher
and low tides what do you think lower
yup
the lunar cycle that's the time the moon
or rather mercury now
needs to go through all the phases would
become 14 hours shorter
but all in all such a replacement
wouldn't have any drastic consequences
for our planet
but then how about venus what if instead
of the familiar satellite
we swap in the third brightest natural
object after the sun and the moon
it's often called earth's sister planet
because their mass and size are nearly
the same
venus would be as large in our sky as
earth once appeared to the apollo
astronauts when they looked at it from
the moon surface
the morning star would be much brighter
than the moon
for one thing the planet reflects six
times more sunlight
plus it would occupy an area at least 16
times larger
that's why nights on earth would be as
bright as early twilight now
if you looked at venus you'd spot vague
swirling patterns
in the planet's yellowish white cloud
cover
venus wouldn't become earth satellite
the two planets would likely orbit
around their common center of mass
and this orbit would be quite eccentric
like me
but if venus moved with the same speed
as the moon has now
the two planets would crash into each
other in the nearest future
uh-oh okay let's pull another switcheroo
if mars was up there in the sky instead
of the moon you'd surely notice it
the planet's disk would look radish oops
sorry make that
reddish and it would be almost twice the
moon's size
even without a telescope you'd be able
to marvel at its unusual color and dark
spots on its surface
and even if you didn't see the red
planet you'd still
feel something unusual mars is half of
earth's size but several times larger
than the moon
replacing a smaller space body with a
much bigger one
would upset the delicate balance on our
planet
if you were unlucky to be at the seaside
when mars took the moon's place
you'd have to evacuate as soon as
possible massive waves would rise in the
oceans under martian influence
they would crash against the shoreline
like the largest tsunamis
mars would be reflecting more sunlight
than the moon nights would be lighter
terrestrial landscapes would have an
eerie red tint
and you'd be able to admire the tallest
mountain in the solar system
olympus mons through a telescope
mars isn't large enough to change the
earth's orbit dramatically
but with time the two planets would
probably begin to orbit each other
creating a binary planet system and
since mars would literally be next door
voyages to this planet would become a
reality
okay now think really big if jupiter
replaced the moon
earth as an independent planet wouldn't
exist anymore
it would instantly turn into another
moon of the largest planet in the solar
system
the only positive moment in this
transformation people would have an
awesome sky view
jupiter is dozens of times larger than
the moon a gigantic
beautifully striped sphere would cover
nearly all the horizon
if you had time to enjoy the show you'd
see yellow brown red and white clouds
floating in jupiter's atmosphere
sadly the gas giant's gravitational pull
would instantly cause severe earthquakes
volcanic eruptions
and tsunamis earth's mantle and crust
would be drawn toward jupiter
which would break the planet apart it'd
be stretched and compressed with such
force
that its surface would bulge back and
forth by more than 300 feet
unfortunately earth speed is only 10 of
the speed needed for us to stay in
jupiter's orbit
that's why our sluggish planet would
crash into the gas giant in less than a
day
well that sounds unpleasant so let's not
do that
now if saturn were to replace the moon
it would be a sight to behold
the planet is more than 35 times larger
than our satellite
it means the giant golden globe would
cover 18 degrees of the sky
and its rings would stretch even further
from horizon to horizon
hey if you like it then you should have
put a ring on it
earth would be a bit further away from
the gas giant than its own moon dion
and since saturn is way more powerful
than our planet
earth would turn into its satellite not
the other way around
unfortunately earth's rotational speed
wouldn't be enough to keep up
and we'd most likely crash into the much
larger planet within a day or two
but before burning up in saturn's
atmosphere we'd have to pass through its
magnificent rings
they're made up of pieces of comets
asteroids and shattered moons
it wouldn't be an easy feat to get
through this space debris
plus our planet would have to avoid
saturn's moons
all 53 of them but what if the fall
didn't happen and earth did turn into
saturn's 54th moon
then the gas giant's gravitational pull
would lead to massive tectonic shifts
all over our globe
they would be tearing the planet's crust
apart until there's nothing left
not good either both uranus and neptune
are ice giants
these planets are the same size larger
than earth but smaller than saturn and
jupiter
they both have icy interiors deep
atmospheres and similar color
very beautiful bluish green if either of
these planets replace the moon
the consequences would be the same so
let's flip a coin
okay it would be neptune you'd see in
the sky one day
neptune is 14 times larger than the moon
the planet would look like a bright blue
hot air balloon in the sky
not only at night but during the day too
it would appear to be 15 times larger
than the sun
if everything else remained the same a
solar eclipse would seem to continue for
ages
once the sun vanished behind neptune's
edge our planet would be plunged
into complete darkness for no less than
an hour and a half
neptune is 17 times the mass of earth
and its gravitational pull is much
stronger
that's why our planet would end up as a
satellite
yep again it would orbit neptune
slightly further than its own largest
moon triton
by the way there would be a great risk
of earth colliding with this
space body but let's assume we were
lucky enough
not to cross path with neptune
satellites even so
there would be more than enough problems
on our hands
tides on our planet would become a
thousand times more powerful than those
caused by the moon
neptune's gravitational force wouldn't
pull earth apart
but it would heat our planet up the
seismic activity would increase
setting off earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions and probably
louse up the internet too but the most
dramatic scenario would happen should
the moon get replaced by
the sun see for yourself the distance
between earth and its natural satellite
is about 240 000 miles and there are
between 28 and 43 million miles between
the sun and mercury
even though this distance is huge
mercury is a scorched deserted place
it has enormous temperature differences
from minus 280 at night
to 800 degrees during the day in other
words
if the sun suddenly appeared as close to
earth as the moon
it would instantly burn everything off
the planet's surface
you wouldn't even have a millisecond to
wow at a blazing ball of plasma
covering the whole sky bring your
marshmallows
solar flares are much longer than the
earth's diameter
just one of them would be enough to melt
the planet's crust
burn its atmosphere and wipe all forms
of life
off the face of the earth so given that
i'll bet those chores around the house
you've been putting off
don't seem so bad now do they